# GIP 0073

- Author(s): gridshell
- Date: 26/06/24
- Status: *Implemented*

# Synopsis
Add ESP8266 support by updating the [vanilla nodes source codes](https://github.com/invpe/GridShell/tree/main/Sources/GridShell).

# Rationale
- Reason for this GIP, what does it solve, improve.

One of the key roadmap points is to support more ULP devices/boards for GridShell. This expansion will increase the range of devices available to connect and contribute to or utilize the network. Until now, GridShell has primarily focused on ESP32, but it was always intended to eventually include ESP8266. These small ULP boards are fully capable of operating with GridShell, and it was only a matter of time before they were integrated. This enhancement, or rather new functionality, broadens the scope of connected devices and allows these ubiquitous boards to join the network.


# Explanation in details

Vanilla source codes have now specific to esp8266 `idfefs` to allow to compile the source codes from Arduino without hassle.
I decided to keep all nodes within one source code for easier maintenance and reduce the overhead of keeping two separate libraries.
There are some specific matters in regards to esp8266 i.e available ram (50KB) but also differences in libraries being used however as i go further
these should be slowly getting eliminated creating a robust single source code supporting both ESP32 and 8266.

The release cycle will also point 8266 devices to their separate binary file, but that will come when im ready with V010.

As of today, the 8266 functionality is added to our GridShell vanilla nodes sources, and compile without issues on arduino, so we can deploy
ESP32 and ESP8266 nodes from the same source code.
to ESP32 has definitely less RAM available for operations, be advised that this can have impact if not run vanilla but with other user sketches.


# Success
- How can we measure the success of this implementation?

Since we're adding ESP8266 to the stack of supported devices - we open up the options for volunteers to join their nodes to GS.
Arch Groupping should also reflect different groups of architectures for 8266.

# Documentation

- Keep open items related to supported devices within the [sources repository](https://github.com/invpe/GridShell/tree/main/Sources/GridShell).

- [Hardware documentation](https://github.com/invpe/GridShell/tree/main/Documentation/Hardware) is now updated with ESP8266


