# GIP 00001

- Author(s): gridshell
- Date: 9/5/22
- Status: *Implemented*

# Synopsis
Default User Performance Factor (UPF) implementation 

# Rationale
- Reason for this GIP, what does it solve, improve. 

This GIP implementes default UPF calculations allowing future enhancements to UPF values in the grid system.
It solves lack of reasonable quantification of the performance of user profiles
It improves (by adding visibility) quality metrics and data visibility, which in later GIP's will be used
to balance the grid workload better.

- What are the expected results.

All users will have their UPF calculated and visible via user json files/api.

- What if it is not done?

We will miss UPF functionality that renders good to bad ratio in jobs execution, causing lack of clarity who performs how.

- Why is it considered the best option?

This is the entrypoint to future UPF rollouts,
Currently no UPF is available, UPF is considered core to the overall ecosystem
therefore this implementation is key.

# Explanation in details
- Provide clean explanation about the new concept

Implement a mechanism to calculate the overall performance of user's nodes by increasing good and bad job counters per node.
This will allow to reflect the good-to-bad ratio for each user on the grid, based on which future improvements to unload validation will happen.

The UPF (User Performance Factor) is a value that reflects the overall validity of jobs execution by user's nodes.
When node has executed a task it returns its output to the grid system following which validation process starts.
When validation is correct good counter increases else bad counter increases (for user).

In this implementation, no additional logic is being done for UPF, just the counters and percentage representation on explorer.

- Clarify implementation details

For each properly validated execution, add 1 to 'good' counter for user

For each invalid execution, add 1 to 'bad' counter for user

Implement UPF% visualisation in explorer for each user


- Is documentation affected? Which?

UPF documentation is already in place for this revision

- Share examples of the implementation usage

A node that has executed a task but returned wrong results (different to validator) will gain his user +1 for bad counter

A node that has executed a task with valid results will gain his user +1 for good counter

Implementation will make it possible to differentiate performance per user for tasks execution

# Success
- How can we measure the success of this implementation?

Via user json files/api 

