# GIP 0002

- Author(s): gridshell
- Date: 10/22/22
- Status: *Implemented*

# Synopsis
Nodes and Validators Architecture type implementation - `ARCH` variable

# Rationale
- Reason for this GIP, what does it solve, improve. 

In distributed computing, where nodes are maintained by community and volunteers the pool of nodes can become highly diverse at some point in time. On hardware level some volunteers might be using ESP32 (as mentioned previously), others can go with ARM based Raspberry PI, rest can contribute using Intel CPUs and so on. Node diversity is allowed and enables the network for scaling its overall performance. At some point in time nodes can return different result hashes compared to validators (even if correctly executed, i.e. float rounding) which can cause additional strain on the network that will have to restart execution (self heal) on differnt nodes until consensus is found (current model).

This GIP is to address this (eventual) challenge by implementing identification process, where each node's architecture type is reported during the authentication phase based on which nodes are grouped into pools together with validators. 

With this GIP we start the process of categorizing nodes and validators into pools based on their architectures.
It is the initial implementation that will be expanded further (if neccessary) and delivers the categorization part 
that is based on the `JOB` command send out by the nodes who will have to provide one of the defined architectures on the network by passing an `ARCH` variable :

- ESP32
- ARMV7L
- LINUX64
- LINUX32
- WIN32
- WIN64

Starting v02 `ARCH` in the `JOB` command becomes mandatory and nodes will be dropped if not providing the pool.

There are no logic changes to the validation mechanism, with this implementation the network still validates across all nodes as it is currently therefore this implementation is vulnerable for incorrect `ARCH` types provided by nodes. This however is not addressed by GIP0002, it will be done by another updates where if a node within a pool does not match resuls with validator from the same pool, it will be dropped from the pool and required to update `ARCH` variable in `JOB` command.

- What are the expected results.

All nodes and validators will be assigned to one of the predefined pools.

Pools will be displayed on the explorer page.

Nodes(nodes+validators) on older library versions will be shown as `unknown`.


- What if it is not done?

If this GIP is not implemented the network will not know about the types of nodes architectures.

- Why is it considered the best option?

Stepping towards categorization of the nodes seems best fit to address eventual issue of for example float rounding.

- One - it builds more complete picture of the available nodes 
- Two - it allows to enable Pool-Validation mechanism in the future (validate only the same arch type)
- Three - it allows for better isolation of eventual problems and results matching (issues can be targetted to specific ARCH) 
- Four - it allows for architecture correctness approximation by benchmark scripts (time of execution)

# Explanation in details
- Provide clean explanation about the new concept

Grid network would like to identify nodes joining.
Nodes will provide their architectures as part of the `JOB` command.
Network will assign them to the corresponding architecture pool.
The network will not change any logic in the validation in this GIP, it is only to assign nodes to architecture pools.


- Clarify implementation details

Implement variable called `ARCH` in the `JOB` command [protocol](https://github.com/invpe/gridshell/tree/main/Documentation/WorkProtocol)

 Check if `ARCH` provided is known
 
 Assign `ARCH` type to the node
 
 Render `ARCH` pools in explorer page
 
 If no `ARCH` provided, assign to `Unknown` pool (old protocol)
 

- Is documentation affected? Which?

Yes, the [protocol](https://github.com/invpe/gridshell/tree/main/Documentation/WorkProtocol)


- Share examples of the implementation usage
  
A node on ESP32 joins the network,

as part of the `JOB` command, he provides `ESP32` variable.

Network accepts this predefied architecture type and assigns the node to `ESP32` pool.

User can see his nodes and pools assigned on the explorer page.

# Success
- How can we measure the success of this implementation?

Pools with nodes and Validators will be visible in Exploer page both on Global and User level.

