# GIP 0003 - Forcing ulp execution
- Author(s): gridshell
- Date: 11/18/22 
- Status: *Implemented*

# Synopsis
GridShell is utilizing ultra low power devices and we pursue zero waste in energy at all times.
Until now, all nodes stayed connected no matter if there were jobs waiting to be executed or not.
From the perspective of energy saving, there is no need to stay online if there is absolutely nothing to do,
it is better to come back in a moment and check if there are tasks to be executed, execute then return to sleep.

This GIP is to introduce a step towards zero waste approach for all nodes contributing to the network.
As part of the welcome message (when connecting to work server) nodes are provided two important values:

`number of tasks awaiting execution` 
This value tells how many tasks are pending execution in current moment.

`number of tasks awaiting validation`
This value tells how many tasks are pending validation in current moment.

See protocol for more info [[https://github.com/invpe/gridshell/tree/main/Documentation/WorkProtocol]](https://github.com/invpe/GridShell/tree/main/Documentation/Protocol)


With these two values rendered at the connection time, nodes can decide wether to continue to stay connected or drop to save power and go deep-sleep for example.

What is a deep sleep ? [https://randomnerdtutorials.com/esp32-deep-sleep-arduino-ide-wake-up-sources/]


Within the latest release of the ESP32 node code, this logic is available for use with `#define SLEEP_WHEN_IDLE`.
nodes who enable this feature:

- will disconnect and enter `deep sleep` mode when there are no tasks to execute at the moment of connection,
- will disconnect and enter `deep sleep` mode after 1 minute of idling post any task execution.

nodes will wake up after specified interval time `SLEEP_TIME` and restart the operation.

Both `SLEEP_IDLE_TIMEOUT` and `SLEEP_TIME` can be defined and tuned to meet your needs.

With the GIP introduced, the server will include both these variables as part of the welcome message sent after the connection is established.
If followed properly it is foreseen to be a great reduction in energy waste especially during no or minimal workloads on the network.

# Rationale
- Reason for this GIP, what does it solve, improve. 

It reduces the energy consumption drastically.

It (hopefully) solves the issue of nodes hanging connected, doing nothing.

It improves integration with GridShell network for devices that require to spend their time on different things

It improves the overall network lifecycle, not requiring operators to keep their devices up and running nonstop.
They can come and go as needed.

- What are the expected results.

The expectation is that nodes will leverage this GIP to drop the connection with the server if there is no work pending.

It is also expected that the overall connection count will drop and will be more based on demand.

There is absolutely no change in any logic with this GIP to the execution process, only two values are added to the 'welcome screen'

*Concept* : Foreseen slotting in future ULP GIP's, where only X amount of slots are available for connections, 
where X is the number of tasks to be executed.

- What if it is not done?

Lack of visibility for nodes to decide wether it is good to stay connected or drop.

- Why is it considered the best option?

It follows the `ulp` energy friendly mission of the GridShell project - which is one of the main goals and assumptions.

# Explanation in details
- Provide clean explanation about the new concept

When nodes connect to the work server, they are presented key value to determine if they should still continue operating or not.
The values are `Number of tasks to execute` and `Number of tasks to validate` (for validators).
When `Number of tasks to execute` is equal to `0` - the server is telling that there is nothing to do and node can easily drop, go sleep and comeback in a moment.

This gives a lot of benefits (mentioned above) to keep the node up and running only when there is a demand, otherwise let devices work on other things or simply go sleep.
Some vendors can leverage this fact which makes it easier for them to integrate their products with GridShell network. 
During low workloads on the network, it might happen that only 10% of the nodes are required, the rest can come back later - which means 90% of energy is saved.
With energy in mind, reduction of waste - this GIP introduces more green and integration-friendly logic to the overall way of executing.

Server side, this is a great improvement - where we expect to switch from handling everyone (including idling nodes) to handling selected ones who are really providing real value
in executing / validating the tasks. 

This GIP does not apply any logic to limiting the connections, everyone is still able to connect and participate no matter if idling or not, the GIP is only introducing
numbers on the welcome screen during connection to the central work server plus implements this logic in the ESP32 node code.

- Clarify implementation details

1. Expose `Number of tasks to execute` during connection with the server
2. Expose `Number of tasks to validate` during connection with the server
3. Implement feature in the ESP32 node code to make use of the mentioned logic and reduce energy waste by:
4. a) Going deep-sleep when no tasks are to be processed
4. b) Going deep-sleep after a predefined interval of time
4. c) Waking up after predefined interval to restart operation

- Is documentation affected? Which?

Yes, https://github.com/invpe/GridShell/tree/main/Documentation/Protocol

- Share examples of the implementation usage

1. When nodeA connects it finds out there is no tasks to be executed.
2. nodeA decides to go deep-sleep for two minutes
3. nodeA wakes up after two minutes and joins the grid again
4. This time it is presented with 45 tasks to be executed
5. nodeA executes assigned tasks
6. nodeA ends execution and idles for 2 minutes
7. nodeA does not get any new tasks, it decides to go deep-sleep for two minutes
8. nodeA wakes up after 2 minutes and restarts operation


# Success
- How can we measure the success of this implementation?

It is foreseen that the first signs of success will be seen on grafana dashboard, where number of total nodes will start to deviate slightly from a stable number, to a number dependant on the available projects and their tasks to execute.
Secondly, all nodes owners who keep track of their nodes wattage usage, will see a definitive drop in energy usage.

