# GIP 0006 - Access to centralized FS

- Author(s): gridshell
- Date: 10/2/2023

# Synopsis
GS Filesystem implementation

Allow nodes to write/read files burning tokens.

Allow scripts to read files for computational purposes.


# Rationale
Grid computing is not only computation, there has to be a way to serve files for computing processes to read and process them.

Implement an easy to use File System on the GridShell central server for nodes to utilize in their processing pipeline.
We want to be able to store telemetry data from nodes and allow this data to be a part of the computational pipeline where 
every node on the network can read chunks of it and perform computing if necessary. Data is stored in flat files on the worker server, 
and all files are accessible via API calls for futher processing - i.e Visualization.
  
- What if it is not done?

If this is not implemented, nodes have no way of storing telemetry on the server and perform computations based on created files.
The only way to provide inputs to the nodes is via payload given as part of the INPUTPAYLOAD string which is not enough, for larger computing requirements.

Due to the limitations in inout payload sizes, this is not suitable for more advanced solutions.
Lack of the GFS is causing limited usage of the network itself, with no headless solutions i.e.
It can be compared to a computer without a harddrive inside, even though very powerfull by definition 
it is lacking major component allowing its usage.

- Why is it considered the best option?

This implementation allows nodes and grid based solutions to have full access to read and write chunks of telemetry files both from the Scripts but also GridShell library.
Grid consumers can think of it as "Storing files in the cloud" - which can be accessed by every node / script they run later on the network.

Sensors can become headless nodes with no additional servers in between by sending telemetry to the Grid Network for storage. 
Users can compute data and visualize it without a need of having any additional infrastructure by referring to gridshell API Endpoints.

From the moment it is implemented, all nodes are given methods of storing and reading data on the Grid Network.
This option fits us best, and implemented opens us for distributed filesystem in the future.
The implementation boosts usability and easiness of adoption of the network.

# Explanation in details
- Provide clean explanation about the new concept

Storage was the key component missing so far in the GridShell network.
We couldn't provide more data for computing than what we could pass to the INPUTPAYLOAD which was very limiting.
Without a possibility to read from files for computing, we were limited to provide data everytime we wanted to perform computation from outside of the gridshell network. 
Now with the Filesystem implemented we can ask the same node that is taking part in computations, tokens earning and reading sensor 
values to write these values on the grid and start a job to calculate averages for the last month without a need of doing it from external system.

This important step allows to build solutions without a need of additional infrastructure (we call them headless) - 
where devices like ESP32 read sensor data, write values (telemetry) on the GRID, request computation (like averages per month/year), contribute in distributed computing, 
earn tokens while the network provides the backend to handle that plus access to all telemetry files over API calls, for your solution to visualize it in the end or grab reports.

In this UPF the work server exposes its disk space for use,
future improvements will use distributed filesystem on grid nodes.

- Clarify implementation details

Maximum filename length: `128b`

Maximum filesize: `1MB`

Maximum telemetry chunk size `512b` (read/write)

Token burned for writing: `1`  

Token burned for reading: `0`

Write allowed every: `1 minute`

  
File names prefixed with Public UserID : `MyGreatDinosaurTHISISMYSENSORMACADDRESSYYMMDDHHMM`
 
- Is documentation affected? Which? 


API documentation

- Share examples of the implementation usage

Store daily telemetry data per sensor on the grid network.
Request grid to calculate average hourly,daily,monthly values from the existing telemetry files.
Access telemetry files and computation results via API

keeping: telemetry,computing,access to results in the gridshell ecosystem.



# Success
- How can we measure the success of this implementation?

By seeing increase in FS growth meaning network users migrating their solution to GS storage.

